i have zero cases let alone
28 today the premier has said victorians
should be
very proud collectively of that effort
given they've had to sacrifice so much
with over a hundred days of harsh
lockdowns i guess the next question will
be though was
what happens with restrictions there's
going to be no announcement on that
until december the 6th but it's always
fun to speculate
the premier daniel andrews has said
initially in september that
28 days of no cases and no active cases
would mean that victoria
would trigger covert normal restrictions
which would essentially mean
that there'd be no density restrictions
on a number
of businesses and things like nightclubs
would reopen
the state now says it's following the
covert safe summer principles
where density restrictions could still
be in place however that will be
subject to the relevant health advice
premier also believes that there's still
some
virus out there with some asymptomatic
cases but i think
at this point now uh melbournians will
be celebrating the fact that it seems as
if
community transmission in the state uh
is all but gone
and the hotel inquiry is back on today
elias what can we expect
it is it's just about to get underway
roz so this all revolves around the
submissions
that were provided after final
submissions were
handed up to the inquiry so we remember
that there was some evidence provided
and then some
uh i guess uh what seemed to be some
contradictions to that evidence so
the most senior person in the in the uh
bureaucracy
chris eckles who since resigned he had
to provide more evidence the chief
health officer brett sutton
lisa neville the premier himself had to
provide more evidence
what's going to happen today is that the
lawyers representing those relevant
parties will submit those documents to
the inquiry
and they'll be made public so it'll be
interesting to see what is in those
documents
the premier hasn't has said that it was
just sort of
dotting the eyes and crossing the t's
and the chief health officer has also
given an explanation as to why he had to
provide more evidence that was
around what he knew in terms of private
security
but just on the hotel quarantine program
was it's
starting to take shape we're getting a
better idea of what we can expect on
december the 7th when that
opens back up the premier said it will
follow a hot hotel
method people will be tested as they
enter victoria
and then if they test positive they'll
have to enter a hotel
with other infected patients but there's
still more detail to be finalised there
okay elias thank you
tasmania is officially open to victorian
travelers as hard borders continue to
fall
reporter fiona blackwood has more from
hobart airport
tasmania is welcoming victorians back to
the state
after eight months of travel
restrictions victoria is tasmania's
closest and perhaps most important
neighbour when it comes to tourist
numbers visiting the state
now given victoria's success in
containing its outbreak
tasmanian authorities have reclassified
the risk from medium to low
travelers into tasmania will still have
to register their details
and like other arrivals will be health
screened but they won't have to
quarantine for 14 days
around 700 people are expected to travel
between victoria and tasmania today
tasmania is now open to all states and
territories except south australia
people from south australia will still
have to quarantine
as tasmanian authorities consider the
risk over the next 24 hours
as travel habits between australian
states slowly return to normal
it's been announced tasmania's museum of
old and new art
mona will reopen its doors on boxing day
more australians stranded overseas will
get home before christmas with the
federal government chartering extra
repatriation flights
but many will still miss out on getting
a flight back with demand far
outstripping the current hotel
quarantine capacity
is political reporter melissa clark from
canberra
well it will certainly be of great
benefit to those who will now make it
back before christmas but
it won't help the tens of thousands of
more who probably won't make it in that
time frame
what we have is the federal government
backing qantas
chartered flights to locations including
frankfurt
and paris there are some flights from
those destinations coming up in
mid-december and we're expecting more
from
london and new delhi as well plus a host
of other ones
that are yet to be announced now we
currently have around
36 000 australians who've registered
that they want to come home and are
trying to find a way to come home
this will go some way in helping that
but the priority will be on around
8 000 or so people who are classified as
being particularly vulnerable
they will be triaged and given priority
in terms of federal government offers
and supports for those for those flights
that they will nonetheless have to pay
for
and quarantine with when they come back
to australia and overnight we've seen
around 30 australians stranded in san
francisco what's happening to them
this is quite an unusual case these 30
australians were
came from all different parts of the us
to get on this flight from san francisco
to sydney
they literally got on the flight and
then the plane sat on the tarmac for a
number of hours last night
until the flight was cancelled because
of mechanical troubles
in a normal time they might just be able
to get on the next flight that
the airline had arranged but because of
the daily caps on the number of
international arrivals in each
jurisdiction here in this case
at sydney that would have thrown
everything out of whack and they were
under the impression that they would
have to wait until the next slot
came up because they couldn't have an
extra 30 people arrive the next day
so that's caused a lot of stress and
tension for those australians in san
francisco
it does look like a resolution is nearly
at hand with the
relevant authorities here in australia
looking to ensure that they don't miss
out on that opportunity and can come as
a
an exemption of having extra people if
they come
today but it's perhaps representative of
the trouble a lot of australians are
finding that
there is no simple way to travel in
covert 19 times
and on another topic than mel the
federal government has today released a
green paper proposing a major shake-up
of australian broadcasting can you take
us through some of those
details yeah this is the federal
government really trying to grapple with
how best to deal with the changing media
landscape and the fact that a lot of
broadcasters are struggling to survive
in these times
the federal government has put forward
this discussion paper with some
very interesting ideas here some that
are likely to be controversial they
include
changing the australian content quotas
for broadcasters so this
puts forward the idea of effectively
removing that content australian-made
content requirement for the commercial
free to wear television networks in
exchange they would
forego some of their spectrum and that
spectrum could be
resold and the cash used to help support
screen australia
the australian children television
foundation and others that help create
australian content
another idea that is put forward is the
idea of putting
a australian or local content quota on
streaming services which the
government's looked at before but not
made a decision on
but perhaps also increasing a quota for
the national broadcasters including the
abc and sbs
so the government has long foreshadowed
making moves in this area it looks like
it's still deciding trying to decide the
best way forward
thanks man now just quick word about
something that is
coming up we are waiting uh for
a media conference to begin that'll be
uh given by the
chief of army um general lieutenant
um rick burr that is coming up very
shortly we will take you to that just as
soon
as it begins so in the meantime
holidaymakers are being asked to stay
away from fraser island as authorities
struggle to control a large bushfire
that's expected to spread over the
coming days
the fire has already burned through 72
000 hectares on the world
heritage-listed island
since it broke out last month
authorities are warning of an increased
fire danger
in coming days and asking residents to
closely monitor conditions
look at the queensland parks and
wildlife service website to find out if
there's any road closures camp closures
and that that sort of stuff there has
been closures
in areas in the past but they need to
look at the
parks and wildlife service website the
park alerts
and you know seriously consider coming i
guess
i'm not trying to steer people away but
the facts are we're dealing with the
wildfire it's burnt through
um you know 70 000 hectares um and
having more people on the island it's
probably a bit more it just creates
more of a challenge for firefighting
operations temperatures arising in
central and eastern australia as a
heatwave takes hold
reporter gabriella merchant is in port
pirie in south australia and dale
drinkwater is in dubbo
in the central west of new south wales
first to gabriella where the
temperatures are already
soaring in port pirie it's really
heating up here in porpiri we were here
earlier and there were people out
exercising and now as the heat has
ramped up
uh there's no one to be seen everyone is
you know hiding away in their houses
it's set to be 43 here in port pirie
but we're actually getting off kind of
lightly compared to some places
further north uh port augusta is going
to be 45
and some places closer to the wa border
are going to be 46
degrees uh as we go through the day and
then into tomorrow those temperatures
are expected to peak even higher
up into the mid to high 40s across
northern
south australia and so we're really
bracing for it here today
in south australia there's a complete
fire ban across the state
so an extreme fire danger warning for
the mount lofty rangers right near
adelaide where there was those cuddly
creek friars earlier this year and a
severe fire danger
for the rest of the state so we're
really bracing for this weather at the
moment
and what do you expect some reprieve
well the reprieve is hopefully coming in
the form of a southerly that should come
through sometime
tomorrow in south australia and that
will actually push that hot weather
further east into new south wales
northern victoria sydney is looking like
it's going to have a very hot
weekend with that southerly change
coming through on sunday afternoon
and that's going to push the weather up
into queensland which is looking like it
could have
you know three to four days of over 40
um in the south part of the southern
part of queensland going into the early
part of next week to dale drinkwater
who's
in dubbo now what's the temperature like
there dale
it's currently 33 uh sorry 34 degrees
and
rising it's going to reach 38
but at 34 degrees i can already feel the
heat coming off the rocks underneath me
at the river here it's coming through
the rubber soles of my shoes
and it's really really warm but it is
nothing compared to
what some of the outer western regional
centers will be experiencing koba's
reaching for 41 today
burke 42 brewarana 41
those temperatures will be continuing
and getting hotter throughout the next
couple of days
brewarana will be experiencing uh from
sunday to tuesday
three days in a row of 44 degrees
at least so 44 degrees and more however
it is the warm nights that have people
concerned
uh the lows over saturday night
are going to be between 26 and 28
degrees
so i don't think the fans will be
helping much for us
so how are people planning to cope then
as the heat rises
well air corns are number one that's for
sure uh and then we've got our local
pool
here in dubbo uh it's quite a good spot
to come and hang there's some big shady
trees so
families will be flocking to the local
pool uh also here at the river behind me
we're at a local swimming spot called
devil's hole which is quite popular
and yeah people will flock here as well
however
the the difference is there won't be
anyone here to watch you and keep you
safe so there are warnings from
authorities to come with a group of
people don't come here alone
always feet first in the water not
jumping off trees which we saw some
people doing here yesterday
and just staying safe around the
waterways the drought the last couple of
years of drought exposed
some of the debris that's underneath
these murky waters here that you
you can't see through so knowing that's
under there
yeah firm warnings from life-saving and
from the police
dale drinkwater there in dubbo and
gabriella merchant in port pier in south
australia keep cool
thank you both donald trump says he will
leave the white house
if the electoral college votes for
democratic president-elect joe biden
it is the nearest he's come to a
concession correspondent greg jennett
has more from washington
at around six o'clock in the evening
local time
on thanksgiving when most people would
probably be watching
football or feasting or both donald
trump invited the cameras
into the white house for what is a
pretty routine and traditional
call to u.s servicemen and women
hundreds of thousands
of them who are based overseas at
present so
he did that and then reverted to the
donald trump of
old because he opened himself to
questions
and regular observers of his behavior
since the election will be aware by now
that he hasn't done that he's made a
couple of
strange monologues in the white house
briefing room
and in the rose garden about various
issues of the day but he's never
fronted four questions and he took
several
tonight so there are many points to be
taken out of this
probably something for everyone there
seemed to be something
approaching at least a mathematical
concession here
which is donald trump saying that if the
electoral college
was all firmed up certified and awarded
to joe biden then he would leave
the white house now that is almost a
statement
of the obvious there are a bunch of
other points that he made and we can
discuss those
in a moment about obstacles that he sees
to awarding the necessary 270 official
electoral college votes that is states
that joe biden
has to officially be certified as one
there are a bunch of obstacles that
donald trump sees there
they're legal ones but why don't we
start first of all with this thing that
is approaching
something of a concession about his own
future
here's how donald trump put that if
the electoral college does elect
president-elect joe biden are you not
going to leave this building
just so you certainly will certainly i
will
and you know that but i think that there
will be
a lot of things happening between now
and the 20th of january
a lot of things states are in the
process of certifying and awarding their
relevant clumps of votes
and they vary state by state depending
on population mostly
some have already certified and so they
are firmly in the columns of biden
and trump there are many more
outstanding but the prediction is
that joe biden will come out with 306
and donald trump falling well short of
the required 270
but and here is the big but donald trump
is going to go to the courts in states
like pennsylvania
possibly arizona although they're not
committed there and argue
all sorts of irregularities particularly
in the count of the vote
in electronic voting systems that he
will ask the courts and in the state
legislatures
in these jurisdictions to say no you
can't award
your state's votes in the electoral
college to joe biden
because they're null and void because of
these irregularities donald trump is
calling this
the biggest most important sorry most
important
story of our time and he says that
fighting this fight as he will through
the courts
is one of the most important things i
will have done
in the entire term of his presidency
maintaining these words
fraud and rigged in relation to the
conduct of
the election so there's a lot of
fighting still to be had here and not
much time
it must be said because the states need
to certify and have ruled off these
electoral college clumps of votes
as we're calling it by the 14th of
december
in france thousands of hospitality
workers have protested against the
nation's lockdown
restaurant pub and club owners gathered
at marseilles old port
calling on the governments to allow them
to reopen france will start a phased
easing of restrictions this weekend
but the hospitality sector has been told
the earliest it can reopen is january
the 20th
france reported more than thirteen
thousand cases yesterday
down from twenty one thousand a week
earlier
football legend diego maradona has been
laid to rest at a cemetery in argentina
the burial followed a procession through
buenos aires
with tens of thousands taken to the
streets earlier there were chaotic
scenes as fans
queued to pay their respects at the
presidential mansion argentina is
observing
three days of mourning after maradona's
death on wednesday
emotions were changing according to uh
the different hours the first reaction
was a complete shock because uh mariluna
had undergone a brain surgery two weeks
ago
and he had fully recovered so uh
so so it was a very surprising
then the the second reaction i would say
was a total
uh grieving and then what we could see
at the plaza de mayo i was there today
um was a mix of of
sadness and and cheerfulness there were
people
uh chanting the songs uh that they
chanted the stadiums
uh there were some bands playing and
um and everything was going pretty well
until uh uh everything everybody was
told that
they were closing the gates of the casa
rosada which
which led to some incidents with the
police but
um well we can say this was what we
were expecting uh he was an idol he was
a legend
for uh for most argentines and a lot of
people around the world
china's commerce ministry has announced
preliminary findings in its anti-dumping
investigation of australian wine
finding dumping exists and it caused
substantial harm to china's domestic
wine industry china correspondent bill
bertels
joins us now hi there bill did china
outline the dumping evidence it found
no rise it didn't china's commerce
ministry has only put out
so far from what we've seen a fairly
brief statement to say that australian
wine
dumping exists it has caused substantial
harm to the local
wine industry in china and according to
the rules and regulations of china's
government
the government can now require
importers of australian wine to pay
what's called a security
deposit to offset
uh dumping it sounds very complicated
but uh the key part of the statement was
from tomorrow the 28th of november
or all australian
fine coming in to ch china security
deposit
importer ranging from between 107
of the value or the price right up to
more than 200
depending on the source of where that
wine comes from so
to simplify this a bit it's basically
like putting
tariffs on australian wine from tomorrow
so what's this going to mean for our
wine industry then because china's a
massive market isn't it
yeah more than 1.2 billion dollars worth
of australian wine was
sold to china last year
this year a huge amount of it was
actually being exported to china up
until recent restrictions
the local industry has been getting
rather concerned about the
rapidly increasing volume of australian
wine going into china this year this is
why
the local industry has been lobbying the
chinese government
to try and put restrictions on
australian product
then the anti-dumping investigation was
announced four months ago
that wouldn't have been announced if
they weren't going to find evidence or
claim they found evidence of dumping
today they say they have
it's not going to conclude ros until
next year anyway but the preliminary
findings
and these massive tariffs is what they
basically are being slapped on
australian wine that pretty
much will cause a huge uh devastation
to the exporters but the thing is
they were already against it because
importers were given informal
instructions earlier this month to stop
buying australian wine so this is just
the latest strike
on on the wine industry from china's
government
and what's the situation with other
australian exports like barley and coal
bill which also attracted big increases
in terrace
so the reports at the moment suggest
that there are now more than
80 bulk carriers sitting off
primarily two chinese ports loaded with
australian coal
that many of these orders would have
been dispatched
before recent informal instructions were
given to
importers to stop ordering coal from
australia
but nonetheless these coal ships are not
able to
unload their cargo it's not just a go
slow it's
it's a go incredibly slow and some of
those ships have been there for many
many months
now yesterday or two days ago china's
government claimed
that inspections had found environmental
quality problems in australian coal and
that therefore
justified holding up all these ships
the reality is in all these different
exports roles whether it's timber
whether it's coal
whether it's wine whether it's cotton
whether it's barley
there's always some technical
justification given by the chinese side
to hold up or block or put restrictions
on
the exports and this whether or not it's
true
it is a way of trying to offset claims
that china is breaching wto
trade laws by putting all these
restrictions on all these different
types of australian exports
thanks bill let's get mark your reaction
to this now with our finance reporter
david chowder we'd
have investors reacted to this china
tariff announcement
well ross pretty much the entire impact
of that has been felt by one company
called treasury wine estates which is
the world's biggest listed winemaker and
uh people may be familiar with its
brands penfolds lindemans and wolf blast
now treasury wines share price dived
more than 14 percent at its lowest point
today on the back of that
china tariff announcement so that's its
biggest fall since
mid-august so as a result of that the
company has
put itself in a trading halt so you
can't buy or sell it shares right now
while chosen it's going to give an
announcement later today to detail
what impact these tariffs will have on
the company
now i imagine it'll be a very big impact
because 40 percent
of this company's wine goes to china
in fact on the broader picture 40 of
australian wine uh goes to china
according to the local wine industry
here
so it's going to have a massive impact
on treasury wine estates
so it's share price it's pretty much
fallen by half since january
also because of the coronavirus pandemic
so when we take a look at the
share prices you can see treasury wine
before it went to the trading hold it
came off its low point so
down 11 now it's the worst performer on
the asx 200.
travel stock's not doing well either
like flight center nor energy stocks
like oil search but it's not all gloomy
gold stocks are doing well same as pizza
stocks and bigger cheese has come off
its trading halt
and it has surged after yesterday's
announcement that it
paid 560 million dollars to take over
lyon derry's milk
yogurt and juice business now the bigger
picture
is that the all lords and asx 200 have
fallen by about 0.6 of a percent
so it's uh on back to this china
announcement it's fallen
even deeper into the red with nearly
every sector in the red
but still that's a tiny loss compared to
how the markets uh perform the past
month is up about 12
since november the first and in currency
is the australian dollar
a bit lower but still relatively steady
at around 73.5
us cents and roz that's the latest in
finance news thanks david
as the coronavirus pandemic continues
scientists are getting
better understanding of the genetics of
covid19 and how the virus
is mutating here's our science editor
jonathan webb
with more hi jonathan so how much is the
covid19 virus
changing or mutating what evidence is
there that that is
happening so the good news is it's not
changing
a lot and we kind of expected that
towards the start of the pandemic what
we know
of previous coronavirus is that they
don't tend to mutate
and and change their genetic makeup all
that fast by contrast with something
like
influenza which chops and changes and
switches things around quite quickly
um but then as the pandemic is worn on
we've got a better and
a better picture of exactly what changes
are accumulating and you will have seen
the odd headline
since you know earlier in the year about
this some this one over here potentially
being a new strain and this
mutation over here potentially being
important all of that takes time to
really
assess and just in the last couple of
months we've seen
quite a few papers all pointing in the
same direction about one particular
change which we
was discussed earlier in the year but it
wasn't clear
how much of a difference it had made and
now there are multiple lines of evidence
that point towards the fact that
a particular mutation in the spike
protein
so that's the anomaly bits on the
outside of the virus that allow it to
get into human cells or other animal
cells
there's a mutation there that first
arose in late january
which has become very dominant dominant
and scientists are starting to agree
that it has made a difference to how
contagious the virus is
but probably not to how serious it is
and how bad the symptoms are if you
catch it
and health authorities in south
australia were recently talking about an
aggressive strain
of the virus being present in the state
that turned out to be
overstated yeah so that evidence was
um we gather and it's not entirely clear
how much genetic information the
authorities had
i certainly haven't seen any sort of
detailed genetic analysis from that
that parafield outbreak but it seems
that they had an indication
just based on their contact tracing that
actually it wasn't taking very long
for one person to catch it incubate it
and then spread it to someone else
obviously then more information came to
light with their contact tracing and
they've slightly
dialed down their expectation there that
was a totally new
or particularly um you know aggressive
or fast moving strain but
this mutation that happened back near
the start of 2020 does seem to have made
a difference potentially to the
the global pandemic in terms of making
it an even more
infectious disease and we've got
evidence now for example a big study
that was just published this month
in the uk based at imperial college
there they have
more than 20 000 sequences of the virus
from different
outbreaks around the country and they
can compare well this one
was seeded by the new variant of the
virus and this one was seeded by the
original
wuhan variant and the ones that were
seeded with the the new mutation
spread much faster there's also an
indication that people with that variant
had a higher viral load and were
shedding more copies of the virus
similarly scientists have taken it into
the lab and taken those two versions
and given them to hamsters and looked at
you know how easily one version is
transmitted
versus the other or how effectively they
spread through a sample of human lung
tissue and again they're all pointing in
the same direction it looks like this
mutation that cropped up quite early
did make quite a big difference and has
potentially led to the
some of the extent of the pandemic that
we've all experienced so what are the
implications jonathan for the vaccines
that are currently
in production if the virus is changing
albeit subtly
so the the good news there is that um
basically this change happened
fairly quickly and possibly because it
helped the virus
to become even more easily spread it is
the dominant strain of the virus
at the moment so most people around the
world in fact the vast majority of
people
who have had covert 19 have had a
version with this mutation in it
it also looks like it's not going to
affect the development of
the vaccines based on these tests that
scientists have been starting to do so
first of all it's worth bearing in mind
that the other control measures
things like distancing shutdowns
and other control measures that are that
are keeping a lid on the virus including
in places like australia
those will continue to work and it looks
like the vaccines
that are showing promise now are showing
promise against that strain as well
so no cause for alarm on the vaccine
front from that mutation
at least thanks jonathan cheers
[Music]
top stories on abc news south
australia's border restrictions with
victoria were left from tuesday allowing
for free travel between the two states
for the first time since march there
have been no new cases of coronavirus
detected in south australia overnight
and the number of active infections has
fallen from 36 to 23
some other restrictions will also be
eased from next week
victoria has recorded no coronavirus
cases for 28 consecutive days
this means the state has achieved the
official benchmark
for eliminating kovid 19 from the
community
under victoria's original roadmap for
re-opening four weeks without a case was
one of the conditions for moving to a
covered normal level
of restrictions donald trump says he
will leave the white house
if the electoral college confirms the
win for democratic president-elect
joe biden mr trump says if his opponent
is certified the election winner as
expected
when it meets next month he will go it's
the nearest he's come
to a concession and holidaymakers are
being asked to stay away from fraser
island as authorities struggle to
control the large bushfire that's
expected to spread over the coming days
the fire has already burned through 72
000 hectares of the world heritage
listed ireland
since it broke out last month
just a reminder we are standing by to
hear from the chief of army lieutenant
general rick burr following the release
of the report into alleged war crimes
in afghanistan this is a live shot from
canberra
we heard yesterday that at least 10 sas
members have received
termination notices we'll bring you that
news conference with the chief of army
i'll bring that to you live just as soon
as it begins
let's get the latest on the coronavirus
situation now here's analyst casey
briggs with more on victoria's
achievement of 28 consecutive days
of no new cases there's not a lot of
cases to talk about so we'll talk about
the lack of cases
28 days straight it's an achievement
that
a lot of people you know politicians but
also
a significant number of epidemiologists
thought was
very difficult unrealistic unlikely to
happen
at this sort of time frame but it has
this 28th day in a row
that victoria has recorded no new cases
and just think about you know how
you know in the grand scheme of things a
relatively short time ago we had
numbers more than 700 so victoria
although
you know this 28-day number is in some
ways arbitrary it's it's a pretty widely
uh agreed uh sort of threshold for
being able to say that that covert has
been effectively eliminated locally
it being sort of twice the upper
estimate for
a a an incubation period for this
virus and with this achievement with
this elimination
new south wales not far behind if there
are no new cases in the next eight or
nine days
new south wales will reach the same
threshold and then there's really only a
few local cases being recorded
uh yeah and they're all basically in
south australia
you know once we get to that point well
australia has achieved
something that really there's not very
many examples of happening
elsewhere in uh the world in fact if you
try and think about how many countries
have had a peak like this uh
have have you know lost grip of the
virus to the point where we're seeing
more than 500 cases a day on average
but then managed to claw it back to a
sustained level very close to zero
there's really only a couple
of examples around the world one of them
is china the first
country where this outbreak all took off
another one is
singapore uh both of those countries
have seen a sustained
period uh with a seven-day average below
20 longer than australia has
has just recorded and australia's just
hit the 40-day mark
there we are you know really in a very
small
club of countries that have managed to
claw back big waves like that and then
of course there are a handful of
countries
that never had waves really to begin
with taiwan being one of them just 625
infections uh have never seen more than
infections in a single day so uh
you know the countries that have
achieved that kind of suppression are
very few and far between and
thankfully australia is one of them as
you say casey south australia is the
place
of most concern here now uh how do you
see the situation there
yeah it is the most concerning situation
but you know in the grand scheme of
things in the way this virus has been
spreading
uh it's a pretty low concern frankly
that's not the right shot i want to show
you this one which is all the locally
acquired
infections uh in the state we have no
more today
and just two yesterday all of the cases
that have been found in south australia
in the last week or so bar
one have been people in quarantine
already they were isolated they were
identified as contacts or closed
contacts
of cases uh or contacts of contacts of
cases i should say
thousands of people put into quarantine
we have still seen this dribble of cases
coming out of
that cohort of people just one really
case outside of quarantine that we're
worried about that was one of the ones
that was
included in yesterday's figures the
woodville high school student
who if they had been aware it seems like
they maybe weren't aware of the health
advice
uh if they had been aware that they'd
been to this pizza bar had in
in the period where infected workers
were working there should
uh have gone into isolation um you know
their their their
um ideal or they would have been in
isolation but it seems like
they weren't i should point out there
was no legally enforceable direction for
them to do so they weren't individually
told
you need to go into isolation so they
have not broken any rules
uh they've just not followed for
whatever reason the
uh the advice that sa health has issued
but really
we're worried about individual cases now
not big clusters and big waves in south
australia that's a very good position to
be in and it means
you can isolate the sorts of people that
you need to put into
isolation you know it's it's it's very
tempting to start obsessing over
individual cases
here it's good to have that kind of be
in that kind of position where you can
mount that kind of response south
australia has just announced plans to
permit dancing at weddings once again in
case you've got some figures on how many
couples have had their marriages
disrupted
this year yeah the wedding industry of
course
with so many weddings cancelled has not
had the greatest of years the bureau of
statistics has just published
some information about weddings through
the first half of the year this is every
week
uh in a typical year uh for the last
five years how many
uh marriages occur each week now i want
to show you this
this year uh though and in the first
half of the year marriages were down 62
um i i'd suggest there's probably a lot
of deferred marriages there rather than
uh you know couples breaking up so it
may well be
uh that there's a lot of deferred
deferred weddings that are going to
occur
into you know the back half of this year
and into next year
and beyond if you're planning uh a
wedding yourself i'd probably get in and
book that venue early because you might
find there's a lot of competition
with all of these uh weddings that maybe
didn't occur uh
still scheduled until slated to occur it
is worth interesting though that we
still had six seven hundred
eight hundred weddings happening across
australia even through the absolute
height of this pandemic uh in australia
so still
significant thousands of people uh not
letting these restrictions
deter them maybe not having the the the
celebration
but still having the you know ceremony
itself casey thanks
the thanksgiving holiday is winding up
in the u.s and signs are that many
people have ignored advice not to travel
as case numbers and deaths from covid19
continue to rise
is dr tina chopra who's professor of
infectious diseases
at wayne state university in detroit
a lot of people are traveling and
despite
public health warnings from cdc for not
to travel refrain from traveling people
are still traveling
and that is the biggest worry i have as
an epidemiologist that
uh three weeks from now four weeks from
now we are going to see a huge spike
uh even bigger than what we are seeing
now um
and come christmas it's going to be
worse so um
this is a big concern we have here so
it's not just the people getting
together it's actually getting there as
well to travel
itself were people taking planes or were
they
driving all kinds of uh travel you know
it's uh it's the not only the act of
traveling but
the fact that thanksgiving is all about
an indoor
um get together people are meeting
indoors and
indoor uh kovit transmission as you know
is
much higher than outdoors it is cold
people are gathered indoors and they are
in large
crowds and that is all that we know is
against
um the rules for preventing covet so all
of those things are going to cause
higher spikes
so what are your concerns then about
what this means for the spread
of the virus yeah so this means higher
hospitalizations and higher
uh death rates for covet you know we've
seen uh huge spikes in april and we are
already
uh now in seeing the second huge surge
where our hospitalizations have gone up
and
um we are seeing uh bed shortages all
over the nation
and uh also a huge number of debts
and if this continues uh you know this
is going to be a huge
overload on the health care system and
the transition from donald trump's
administration to joe
biden's now seems to be underway has
there been any noticeable
shift in people's behavior in response
to the messages coming out
from the president-elect on covet we're
leaving that to take you live now to
canberra where chief of army lieutenant
general rick burr
is speaking to set the scene
over 26 000 people served in afghanistan
on operation slipper and extraordinary
things were achieved by many
through their service and sacrifice
during australia's longest operation
last thursday the cdf briefed the
findings of the ijadf
afghanistan inquiry report which focused
on events between 2005 and 2016.
as part of the inquiry 423 witnesses
were interviewed the cdf accepted all
the recommendations of the report
and defence is now developing a
comprehensive implementation plan
on the same day cdf delivered the
findings
i was in perth and i briefed the sas
regiment
on the report commander special
operations command did the same
in sydney at the special operations
forces units
in my remarks to the sas i said that i
would take action
in accordance with the report's
recommendations
there are two processes in relation to
this that i would like to explain
one is a referral to the office of the
special investigator
which the cdf is now considering
secondly what i can do within my
authority is at the chief of the army
to uphold army's values and professional
standards
people are aware that this is the
process
that this process is underway
administrative action is a long-standing
well-established process
within defence that ensures the rights
of individuals
to due process and fair hearing this
process
is well known to all in army
at this time 13 individuals have been
issued administrative action notices
in relation to the afghanistan inquiry
at this point in time no individuals
have been separated from the australian
defense force
administrative action includes receiving
a notice proposing to terminate the
individual service
the individual then has the opportunity
to respond
within a minimum of 14 days
the decision maker must consider any
written response
that the individuals provide before
making a decision
each matter and individual circumstance
will be considered
on a case-by-case basis
it is essential the privacy be respected
and that procedural fairness is followed
and that no further comment be made
until the process is complete
it is critical that for any judicial
disciplinary
or administrative action due procedural
process
must occur i want to stress the
importance
of acknowledging and respecting the
privacy of individuals
and enabling due process to take its
course
legal welfare and command support is
provided to anyone who is subject
to administrative action this whole
process will take
time and we will do this work
methodically
deliberately in accordance with
established
process again i reiterate
my confidence in the australian army we
are all committed
to learning from the inquiry and
emerging
from this a stronger more capable and
effective army
thank you i'll now take one or two
questions
of the people who've been issued notices
have been given
those notices for all 13 include a
proposed proposing to terminate their
service
and are you able to shed any light on
whether
those 13 are the same or separate to the
individuals that the report suggested be
referred to the office of special
investigator
i won't comment on individuals or
individual
cases we must follow a very fair and
well-established process
as we go through this in a very
deliberate way
separate i know but we have seen um
generals in japan hanged for war crimes
that they had
no knowledge of can you tell me why you
shouldn't resign
there is a process to be followed here
we've received the
inquiry one week ago we need to follow a
very deliberate very methodical and very
fair process
ensuring that we respect every
individual's privacy
and right of reply this will take time
it took four and a half years to work
through this report
it was delivered one week ago and we are
now working
through it already commander's caught up
in this that have been given notices i
won't comment on any individuals or
individuals okay
it's all all of us been on there process
to be followed here as we work through
this
we must ensure the privacy of all
individuals
uh we are all holding ourselves to
account as an organisation and we will
work through this in a proper way
that's why we ask for the report
lieutenant general there's been
significant backlash to the idea that
around 3 000 special forces soldiers
would have their meritorious unit
citation stripped
do you think it's fair that they all
have it removed for the actions
and if that's the case in terms of
collective responsibility shouldn't
angus campbell's
distinguished service cross be removed
given he commanded this
operation i support the logic of the
recommendation
in the report which says that if we knew
then what we know now
the unit would not have received or been
put forward for a meritorious unit
citation
there is now a process to be followed as
we consider all of those recommendations
for individual and collective awards and
we will follow that process in a proper
and fair methodology and make sure that
everyone's
privacy is respected 3 000
men and women who served with the same
brushes that the 19 who have been
singled out
so much good work was done by so many
people in afghanistan
and that is absolutely not forgotten on
me
or anyone who has served there we're all
committed to making sure that that
legacy
is understood is preserved and we honor
the sacrifice
of so many their commitment of so many
over a sustained period of time
i acknowledge their service the support
of their families
through this process i acknowledge the
fallen and pay my respects absolutely
to those families we will not forget
them we will honour their legacy
that's all i have i'll take one more
question and then i'll leave thank you
did describe this recommendation as a
knee-jerk reaction
and it being disgusting and unaustralian
what's your reaction to that
it took four and a half years to get
this report it's comprehensive we're
working through all the recommendations
in a
methodical way uh i'm taking action uh
within
my authorities as the chief of army
against some individuals
and that's all i'll say on that matter
that was chief of army lieutenant
general rick burr speaking about the
impact of the afghan report which was
released
last week he says cdf has accepted all
the recommendations and defenses working
out how to implement them
taking action against the sas he said
referring to the office of special
in the office of the special
investigator and he also commented on
upholding professional standards
in the army well let's go to our
political editor andrew probably now
who's listening to that
also in canberra hi andrew uh so action
then has started within defence on the
back of the
afghan report just to outline what's
going to happen
so what we heard there from the head of
army is that 13
administrative action notices
so-called have been issued against
presumably 13 active or serving
soldiers now he's saying that this
doesn't immediately
terminate their position in the army
but that these these 13 people have
got 14 days to to give notice of
of of whether they want to appeal and
and have their position
uh reinstated or
or challenged um now another issue that
he talked there about was this uh
meritorious
unit citation that was given to special
operations
task group for uh for services between
and 2013. now of the many
recommendations in the bretton report
one was that the
sotg meritorious citation be stripped
now that's caused some concern inside
the special
forces community in fact there's a as a
petition that's circulating it's got
about forty thousand uh signatures
um saying that that is not the the right
way
uh to proceed because it uh uh
the sins of a few uh are going to be uh
affecting the
the lives of the many who who gave
gallanton
brave service now on that uh rick burst
says
that he's fully supports the decision by
uh the cdf to strip that uh citation
because he said
if we uh knew then what we
knew now uh that the meritorious
citation would never have been granted
so
ros we've got a whole period now where
this not only do we have to
listen and and wait for what the uh
the defense force does in response to
the breton report but it looks like it's
uh
sort of getting to the nitty-gritty now
and it'll be a process that's going to
take
many many years you'd think yeah and
rick burr was asked this specific
question uh then that media conference
the 13 people who've been issued these
termination notices
they are separate to the 19 soldiers who
recommended for investigation
in the report are they uh it's a bit
unclear from
from the answer answer there uh of
course there
are quite a number of uh of soldiers who
were
referenced to uh in the breton report of
course it was
redacted we don't know any uh identity
of of those
of those soldiers um so i think we can
assume though that the 13
are uh still serving that there'd be
some of those uh soldiers who were
mentioned in the breton report or
referenced uh some might have left the
defence force
andrew thank you thanks ross
let's look at the national weather now
brisbane partly cloudy sydney canberra
cloud
clearing mostly sunny in melbourne with
the top there of
34 degrees today mostly sunny in hobart
hot with a top of 40 degrees in adelaide
partly cloudy
in perth and darwin a possible
thunderstorm
a painting by renowned artist brett
whiteley has set a new record for the
price
paid for an australian artwork at
auction
ori's armchair was sold in sydney in
just under five minutes
going for 6.1 million dollars
the painting shows the view of sydney
harbour from brett whiteley's former
studio home
and has been loaned to many art
exhibitions since it was painted
in 1974. the buyer from sydney's north
wishes to remain anonymous australians
enjoying a glass of champagne that is
abc news for now a reminder that you can
keep up to date on all the latest news
across all your devices at
news.obc.net.ou and on abc iview
i'm ros chiles coming up on the abc news
channel i'll have more on today's top
stories including more
on that breaking news this hour 13
members of army issued with
administrative action notices
following the release of the afghan
report last week
stay with us
[Music]
[Applause]
whenever you want wherever you are know
the story with abc news
the most trusted news source get
breaking news updates with live
notifications
plus the latest news from australia and
around the world if the situation
deteriorates the hard border comes back
go to news dot news.abc.net.edu or
download the news app
for those of you who haven't thrown out
your 2020 bingo cards did you have this
one
in a year where everything has been
unexpected join us to make sense of it
all
when boris johnson is on the phone and
saying right now i'm sorry to bring this
up we listen to the experts when it
comes to the pandemic but we're not
listening to the experts when it comes
to climate change this is the difficult
thing for women middle age
we have hugged them to look forward to
proud millennial right here
i already grew all this grace i'm just
gonna hang here the drum
tonight at six on abc in eye view
if we don't learn we are condemned to
make the same mistakes the spanish flew
in australia
it was often called the forgotten
pandemic and the striking parallels
today they shut the schools
and places of gathering the states shut
their borders straight away
amazed at the resemblance australian
story special encore
monday abc it was a summer that burnt a
hole in the heart of the country
have we lost whole animal cultures now
come the incredible stories of hope
nature will come back it's happening
already and resilience
feels amazing i'm just so stoked to see
this little one
narrated by hugo weaving it will take
many years and much human help wild
australia
after the fires tuesday 8 30 on abc and
eye view
grandstand summer of cricket is here
live and ad free
as australia face off against fierce
rivals
behind get all the action from the one
day internationals
the t20s and the test series grandstand
summer of cricket
live on abc radio and the abc listen app
we are one but we are
many and from all
the lands on earth we call
we share a dream
we are
[Music]
i am
china to impose anti-dumping tariffs on
australian wine
[Music]
13 adf personnel now facing dismissal in
the wake of the afghanistan war crimes
inquiry
no new coronavirus cases in south
australia with border restrictions with
victoria
to be lifted and temperatures on the
rise in central and eastern australia
as the first heat wave of the season
hits
hello and welcome to abc news i'm ross
chiles china's commerce ministry has
announced preliminary findings in its
anti-dumping investigation of australian
wine
finding dumping exists and it causes
substantial harm
to china's domestic wine industry here's
china correspondent bill bertels
china's commerce ministry has only put
out so far
from what we've seen a fairly um brief
statement to say that australian wine
dumping exists it has caused substantial
harm to
the local wine industry in china and
according to
through the rules and regulations of
china's government
the government can now require
importers of australian wine to pay
what's called a security
deposit to offset
uh dumping it sounds very complicated
but uh the key part of the statement was
from tomorrow the 28th of november
or all australian
fine coming in to ch china uh security
deposit
importer ranging from between 107
of the value or the price right up to
more than 200
depending on the source of where that
wine comes from so
to simplify this a bit it's basically
like putting tariffs on australian wine
from tomorrow so what's this going to
mean for our wine industry then because
china's a massive market isn't it
yeah more than 1.2 billion dollars worth
of australian wine was sold
to china last year uh this year
a huge amount of it was actually being
exported to china up until
recent restrictions the local industry
has been getting rather concerned about
the
rapidly increasing volume of australian
wine going into china this year this is
why the local industry has been lobbying
the chinese government
to try and put restrictions on
australian product
then the anti-dumping investigation was
announced four months ago
that wouldn't have been announced if
they weren't going to find evidence or
claim they found evidence of dumping
today they say they have
it's not going to conclude ros until
next year anyway but the preliminary
findings
and these massive uh tariffs is what
they basically are being slapped on
australian wine that pretty much
will cause a huge uh devastation to
the exporters but the thing is they were
all against it because
importers were given informal
instructions earlier this month to stop
buying australian wine so this is just
the latest strike
on on the wine industry from china's
government and what's the situation with
other australian exports like
barley and coal bill which also
attracted
big increases in tariffs so the reports
at the moment suggest that there are now
more than 80 bulk
carriers sitting off primarily two
chinese ports loaded with australian
coal
that many of these orders would have
been dispatched
before recent informal instructions were
given to importers to stop ordering coal
from australia
but nonetheless these coal ships are not
able to
unload their cargo it's not just a go
slow it's
it's a go incredibly slow and some of
those ships have been there for many
many months
now yesterday or two days ago china's
government
claimed that inspections had found
environmental quality problems in
australian coal and that therefore
justified holding up all these ships
the reality is in all these different
exports roles whether it's timber
whether it's coal
whether it's wine whether it's cotton
whether it's barley
there's always some technical
justification given by the chinese side
to hold up or block or put restrictions
on
the exports and this whether or not it's
true
it is a way of trying to offset claims
that china is breaching wto trade laws
by putting all these restrictions on all
these different types of australian
exports
thanks bill we're taking you live now to
toowoomba in queensland where the
federal agriculture minister david
little proud
is speaking and in light of their recent
comments
it would be give the perception that
these
imposing of these tariffs are relating
to other matters rather than any
wrongdoing by the wine industry
if that is the case that would be in
contravention of
trading rules that australia undertakes
with all nations that we have free trade
agreements and expect to be treated in
return
we as an australian government will
support the wine industry closely
in being able to respond to these tariff
impositions put on the industry 107 to
212 percent has been placed
across a range of brands that go into
china
we have 10 days in which to appeal and
we'll obviously work closely with
with the industry around that it's a 2.9
billion industry and accounts for around
of our total wine exports and it has
seen a significant increase
over the last couple of years because of
the
appetite for australian wine in china so
the australian government will
vigorously defend the industry
but we are deeply concerned by this and
obviously in light of those recent
comments by
china it gives that perception that this
decision
is predicated on that rather than any
wrongdoing by the wine industry and we
would ask
for open dialogue with them to get
assurances around that
and the trade minister and i have openly
and continually tried to make sure
that there are avenues for that dialogue
to take place and we will continue to do
that
that is the best way in which to resolve
any issue
but it has to be done in a transparent
way and we'll continue to make sure
that we support the industry through
this has there been any dialogue
so far on this not at ministerial level
but obviously
my officials and department of foreign
affairs and trade in
beijing are working as quickly as we can
in fact this afternoon we'll be
trying to start a meeting with the wine
industry here in australia around the
next steps
that they wish us to take on their
behalf but obviously we'll vigorously
defend this
this is a preliminary decision as a
result of their
of their findings of wanting to start an
investigation some months ago
so we'll obviously respect that process
but we
would expect that there is transparency
and understanding
about this decision that's something
that obviously gives us great concern as
a government we are a fair trading
nation
and we expect those that trade with us
to do exactly the same david what's your
message to winemakers across the market
well we'll work with them we've already
opened up other markets and we're
continuing
as we speak to try and secure a free
trade agreement with the eu and uk which
wine
is very prominent with we've got a
strong track record of supporting the
wine industry
in fact we've taken canada to the wto
with respect to some discrimination we
felt that they put against wine
producers
and obviously we'll exhaust all avenues
that are available to us under the
process set out through the wto that
that's what a good trading nation will
do a fair trading nation will do
is use the process uh we'll respect the
process but we expect to be
respected in return to appeal what are
the chances of that actually succeeding
given the lack of dialogue
well it's too early uh to understand
that obviously we're just trying to to
get an appreciation
of the reasoning behind this uh
determination of in introducing these
tariffs
that's why we're moving quickly to work
with not only the industry but
my officials and dfat officials in
beijing to get an understanding so that
we can put our case
around around this decision and
imposed on the wine industry that we
feel
is quite uh outrageous and and to be
honest
disproportionate uh to anything to any
reason that anyone has put to us
subsequently
do you expect more commodities to be
facing
well we'd expect not and that's the
reality that we
now continue to want to enrich our
dialogue with china because
uh obviously in light of their recent
comments it gives the perception
that any imposition of tariffs or duties
on any australian product
is predicated on on other matters rather
than
anything that an agricultural industry
has done wrong so it's important
for not only australia but all trading
partners to china
they get that appreciation if china
wants to trade openly
uh with the world they need to be able
to give that confidence to the world
that they are also going to adhere uh to
the trade rules set out
under the wto so just for the other do
you think
we've been already working on this in
fact there's 14 free trade agreements in
place
many of which this government's put in
place and that's why we're continuing
now to work
on the eu uk we had the regional
partnership that was announced
for 10 countries the biggest trade
agreement in the world
30 billion trillion dollars uh 30 of the
the world's population so we've
obviously already been working
comprehensively around the world in
giving our producers the opportunity to
spread their risk
but we expect no matter where we trade
to be treated fairly
and to be based on fair trading rules
that are set out through the wto
well this decision obviously the the
perception that's come out of this in
light of china's recent
uh recent comments gives the perceptions
that it's more about their grievances
around those matters
rather than in fact around anything any
industry has done wrong
and this is a slippery slope that needs
to be addressed
and we can only do that with dialogue
because obviously
it just doesn't worry australian
exporters but it'll worry exporters from
around the world
that we want to trade in a fair fair
basis under fair trading rules and it's
important we all adhere to that
we're transparent about that and that's
why we'll continue to try and have
dialogue with china to get an
appreciation on this but
the perception today clearly gives that
uh that meaning to the fact that uh
their recent comments go more to the
heart of their grievances around that
than
there is around industry having having
done
touted a couple of wrong ago did you try
and have any dialogue in the past two
weeks now before we've seen any specific
characters
we're continuing to have dialogue
through our officials in beijing and
both myself and minister birmingham
have continued to make it clear to our
counterparts in beijing that
we are more than open to continue on in
dialogue and to
to actually try to resolve any issues
that they may have
that is what leadership is about we
don't intend to throw toys out of the
cot we're going to be mature about this
we're going to continue
to try and have that dialogue because
trade between both nations
benefits both nations china has
benefited from
exports from australia as we have from
china and we'll continue to try and
enrich that relationship because that is
what will benefit both nations
well that's a matter for the chinese
officials to
to in fact clarify but that's why uh
we continue to say that the decision
today
gives the perception uh that this is
about other matters other than
uh agricultural industries doing the
wrong thing and that's why it needs to
be clarified it needs to be clarified in
a mature
way that we can transparently get an
understanding and that's why we continue
to reach out and want to have dialogue
to get that appreciation understanding
david the prime minister of the federal
government consider addressing china's
preferences to save pharmacy
we will never compromise on our nation's
values and principles or our sovereignty
never that is what any australian
government of any political persuasion
is elected to do
that is what hundreds of thousands of
australians have lost their lives
defending
we are the fierce custodians of that and
we will never
never compromise any of those values and
principles
we are a sovereign nation we expect to
be treated uh
with the respect of a sovereign nation
being allowed to make our own decisions
as we respect those nations around the
world that make their own sovereign
decisions
we will not be for turning um david
we're trying to
mean with the federal government
australia is a fair trading nation we
will play by
the rules set out to us we have a proud
track record with respect to that
we just expect to be treated fairly in
return
thanks thanks guys that's federal
agriculture minister david little proud
there with the government's reaction to
the news that china is to impose
deposits
or tariffs on us the australian wine
exports that's after preliminary
findings
of a report which china says shows
evidence of dumping and david little
proud
saying that the government is moving
quickly to vigorously defend the
australian wine industry and is reaching
out to chinese authorities
to negotiate and we will be speaking to
the head of the industry body australian
grape and wine a little later this hour
to get their reaction to this news
now to some news just in an emergency
warning has been issued for a bushfire
burning under severe weather conditions
at templars
north of adelaide the country fire
service says the grass fire is burning
towards roseworthy freeling
and lindock in the barossa valley it
says the uncontrolled fire may pose a
threat to lives directly in its path
the temperature in roseworthy has
reached 44.6 degrees today
we'll continue to keep you updated on
that fire throughout the course
of the afternoon to queensland now and
holidaymakers are being asked to stay
away from fraser island
as authorities struggle to control the
large bushfire that's expected to spread
over the coming days
the fire has already burned through 72
000 hectares
on the world heritage listed islands
since it broke out last month
authorities are warning of an increased
fire danger in coming days
and asking residents to closely monitor
conditions
look at the queensland parks and
wildlife service website to find out if
there's any road closures camp closures
and that that sort of stuff there has
been closures
in areas in the past but they need to
look at the
parks and wildlife service website the
park alerts
and you know seriously consider um
coming i i guess
i'm not trying to steer people away but
uh
the facts are we're dealing with the
wildfire it's burnt through
you know 70 000 hectares and um
having more people on the island is
probably a bit more it just creates
more of a challenge for firefighting
operations the chief of army has
revealed 13 members of the australian
defense force
face the prospect of being sacked in the
wake of the afghanistan war crimes
inquiry
it follows the release of a report
commissioned by the inspector general of
the australian defense force
alleging special forces soldiers were
responsible for unlawful killings in
afghanistan
lieutenant general rick burr says the
members have 14 days to respond
to administrative action notices
proposing to terminate
their service at this time
13 individuals have been issued
administrative action notices
in relation to the afghanistan inquiry
at this point in time no individuals
have been separated from the australian
defense force
administrative action includes receiving
a notice proposing to terminate the
individual service
the individual then has the opportunity
to respond
within a minimum of 14 days
the decision maker must consider any
written response
that the individuals provide before
making a decision
each matter and individual circumstance
will be considered
on a case-by-case basis
it is essential that privacy be
respected
and that procedural fairness is followed
and that no further comment be made
until the process
is complete it is critical
that for any judicial disciplinary or
administrative action
due procedural process must occur
i want to stress the importance of
acknowledging and respecting the privacy
of individuals
and enabling due process to take its
course
legal welfare and command support is
provided to anyone who is subject
to administrative action this whole
process will take
time and we will do this work
methodically
deliberately in accordance with
established
process the border between south
australia and victoria is to reopen
on tuesday as essay records no new cases
of coronavirus
the premier stephen marshall has also
announced changes to restrictions in the
state
here's reporter ben nielsen south
australians and victorians haven't had
free travel across that border since
march at least and we heard just a bit
earlier this afternoon
that as of next tuesday they will allow
be allowed across that
whole border restriction will be dropped
entirely allowing for free travel
here's what the premier had to say about
that new easing of restrictions
the border restrictions which have
existed with victoria will be completely
lifted
as of midnight on monday night uh next
week
so from the 1st of december we will
completely normalise our border
arrangements with victoria and i know
that this will be a huge relief
for many people who have been adversely
affected
by these border restrictions currently
in victoria there is a permanent
permit system based on the hot spots
here in adelaide
that have arisen as part of that cluster
that emerged last week roz
but the premier also announced a range
of other restrictions that will be
easing
next week as well that includes patron
caps at venues so long as they have
a new qr system that will be implemented
by the state government through
a an app that they're building also
density requirements for
private and public gatherings funerals
weddings and private gatherings will be
increased to 150 some events will still
require
a covert safe permit through the
government but community support also
resumes as of tuesday
but the one thing that is still halted
is international flights
so that is currently uh cancelled until
the end of november the premier has said
that will now be extended to at least
uh mid december he has asked the
commonwealth for that to occur
but he has reiterated that he's still
very um
very uh willing to contribute to that
scheme for overseas repatriation
ben what is the latest on that parafield
cluster
so today we heard there are no new cases
associated with the cluster
or any with hotel quarantine as well so
that's good news health authorities are
saying
so as it stands ros there are 31
involved in the cluster
there are 23 active which has diminished
in the last 24 hours
but there are about 5 000 people in
quarantine currently
and one woman still in hospital she was
associated with
the family that tested positive at the
beginning of the cluster
there are a bunch of new locations that
have been identified as hot spots as
part of the cluster they're in the
western suburbs two large
shopping center precincts arndale and
port adelaide plaza
and the chief public health officer
nicolas spurrier also said that
uh the the investigation into hotel
quarantine
is ongoing and they're looking at a
ventilation and movement right now
that's not air conditioning
conditioning but the ventilation and
fresh air that
occurs in hotel quarantine and she said
she'd she'd like to make that public
in south australia and to national
authorities as quickly as she could
thanks ben victoria has reached a major
milestone today for 28 consecutive days
there have been no new coronavirus cases
this means the state has achieved the
official benchmark for eliminating
covid19 from the community
the last active case was cleared and
discharged from hospital on monday
an announcement will be made on december
the 6th about the further easing of
restrictions
victoria's premier daniel andrews is
fronting an inquiry into the state
government's coronavirus response
he's outlined features of the new hotel
quarantine program
which will include dedicated staff who
won't have multiple jobs
and the regular testing of staff it also
faced questions about how the initial
program was conceived
and who decided to use private security
guards
in august you told me that the decision
to use private security guards
in the hotel quarantine program was uh
an evolution i think the term was he
used of
an existing program the hotels for
heroes program
uh now that that obviously the hotel
quarantine program was established on
the 27th of march
hotels for heroes wasn't wasn't
established until the 5th of april
how can how could it have been an
evolution of that program when it didn't
get established because
later because mr o'brien again the facts
are always quite challenging i think
with some of these
false constructions of history we had
been long discussing
and developing and developing
the program you refer to when it became
when it was stood up is not the point
at issue here it is when
it is simply accurate to say that as a
government
and various agencies that work for the
government had been
giving regard and thought and had been
doing hard work to develop
that hotels for heroes program
uh that well and truly predated the 27th
of march
but in any event but in any event in any
event
mr o'brien um it's not for me
uh to to preempt a process
that in answer to mr reardon i've
indicated to you and i think in your
very first question you've just referred
to a hearing that's literally going on
right now i'm not asking you to preempt
the process yes you are i'm afraid no
this is a
yes you are premiere this is a parallel
enquiry that i might remind you
you asked payette to do you
yes you said you had confidence in us i
don't think that i had any point asking
there is
no at no point did i request that you
think
why can the premier interrupt me when
i'm asking a question but i can't
interrupt him the premiere will allow mr
o'brien to finish his question
so premiere with respect to
this program this hotel quarantine
program
if it was in fact uh an evolution of the
hotels for heroes which you just said
was being developed for some time who
made the decision
to use private security guards rather
than police or or
adf well i'd have to go back and
check the record in relation to those
matters and what i think you're doing at
the moment is you're
without any doubt at all you are cutting
across
issues that are under active
consideration by an independent board
okay and whilst you you are correct to
say that
the government was very pleased to have
paid play this role in terms of
oversight of our pandemic response at no
point did i invite any member of this
committee
to to essentially undermine or cut
across or
in any way hambor or hinder the board of
inquiry
tasmania is officially open to victorian
travelers as hard borders continue to
fall
reporter fiona blackwood has more from
hobart airport tasmania is welcoming
victorians back to the state
after eight months of travel
restrictions victoria is tasmania's
closest
and perhaps most important neighbour
when it comes to tourist numbers
visiting the state
now given victoria's success in
containing its outbreak
tasmanian authorities have reclassified
the risk from medium to low
travelers into tasmania will still have
to register their details
and like other arrivals will be health
screened but they won't have to
quarantine for 14 days
around 700 people are expected to travel
between victoria and tasmania today
tasmania is now open to all states and
territories except south australia
people from south australia will still
have to quarantine
as tasmanian authorities consider the
risk over the next 24 hours
as travel habits between australian
states slowly return to normal
it's been announced tasmania's museum of
old and new art
mona will reopen its doors on boxing day
temperatures arising in central and
eastern australia as a heatwave takes
hold
reporter gabriella merchant is in port
pirie in south australia and dale
drinkwater is in dubbo in the central
west
of new south wales first at gabriella
where the temperatures are already
soaring
in port pirie it's really heating up
here in porpuri we were here earlier and
there were people out exercising
and now as the heat has ramped up uh
there's no one to be seen everyone is
you know hiding away in their houses
it's set to be 43
here in port pirie but we're actually
getting off kind of
lightly compared to some places further
north uh port augusta is going to be 45
and some places closer to the wa border
are going to be 46 degrees
as we go through the day and then into
tomorrow those temperatures are expected
to peak even higher
up into the mid to high 40s across
northern
south australia and so we're really
bracing for it here today
in south australia there's a complete
fire ban across the state
so an extreme fire danger warning for
the mount lofty rangers right near
adelaide
where there was those cuddly creek
friars uh earlier this year
and a severe fire danger for the rest of
the state so
we're really bracing for this weather at
the moment and what do you expect some
reprieve
the reprieve is hopefully coming in the
form of a southerly that should come
through sometime
tomorrow in south australia and that
will actually push that hot weather
further east into new south wales
northern victoria sydney is looking like
it's going to have a very hot
weekend uh with that southerly change
coming through on sunday afternoon
and that's going to push the weather up
into queensland which is looking like it
could have
you know three to four days of over 40
in the south part of southern part of
queensland are going into the early part
of next week
to dale drinkwater who's in dubbo now
what's the temperature like there
dale it's currently
33 uh sorry 34 degrees and
rising it's going to reach 38
but at 34 degrees i can already feel the
heat coming off the rocks underneath me
at the river here it's coming through
the rubber soles of my shoes
and it's really really warm but it is
nothing compared to
what some of the outer western uh
regional centres will be experiencing
koba's reaching to 41 today
burke 42 brewarana 41
those temperatures will be continuing
and getting hotter throughout the next
couple of days
brewarina will be experiencing from
sunday to tuesday
three days in a row of 44 degrees
at least so 44 degrees and more however
it is the warm nights that have people
concerned
uh the lows over saturday night
are going to be between 26 and 28
degrees
so i don't think the fans will be
helping much rose
so how are people planning to cope then
as the heat rises
well air corns are number one that's for
sure
and then we've got our local pool here
in dubbo
uh it's quite a good spot to come and
hang there's some big shady trees so
families will be flocking to the local
pool uh also here at the river
behind me we're at a local swimming spot
called devil's hole which is quite
popular
and yeah people will flock here as well
however
the the difference is there won't be
anyone here to watch you and keep you
safe so there are warnings from
authorities to come with a group of
people don't come here alone
always feet first in the water not
jumping off trees which we saw some
people doing here yesterday
and just staying safe around the
waterways the drought the last couple of
years of drought exposed
some of the debris that's underneath
these murky waters here that you you
can't see through
so knowing that's under there um yeah
firm warnings from
life-saving and from the police dale
drinkwater there in dubbo and gabriella
merchant in port pier in south australia
keep cool
thank you both
[Applause]
top stories on abc news china is
imposing anti-dumping measures
on australian wines announcing the
preliminary findings of its
investigation into australia's one
billion dollar annual wine exports
beijing has declared that dumping exists
and causes chinese winemakers
substantial harm
from tomorrow importers of all
australian wine entering china will need
to
pay temporary anti-dumping security
deposits
chief of army has revealed 13 members of
the australian defense force face the
prospect of being sacked in the wake of
the afghanistan war crimes inquiry
the report was commissioned by the
inspector general of the adf
alleging special forces soldiers were
responsible for unlawful killings in
afghanistan
[Music]
south australia's border restrictions
with victoria will lift from
tuesday allowing for free travel between
the two states for the first
time since march there have been no new
cases of coronavirus detected in south
australia overnight
and the number of active infections has
fallen from 36 to 23
some other restrictions will also be
eased from next week
and the first major heat wave of the
season is starting to grip central and
eastern australia and will bring
scorching conditions over the weekend
temperatures of up to 46 degrees are
expected in some parts of queensland
while western sydney is forecast to hit
42 degrees
authorities are warning of an increased
fire danger
we are expecting the trade minister
simon birmingham to speak in adelaide
shortly following china's decision to
impose
anti-dumping measures on australian
wines we'll bring that to you as soon as
it begins
the northern territory government says
the quarantine facility outside darwin
will be able to handle a doubling of
international arrivals under a new deal
with the federal government
the howard springs workers camp will
begin taking 1 000 arrivals per
fortnight
up from 500. chief minister michael
gunner says as domestic borders lift
there'll be a greater capacity at the
center we are working to double from 500
to a thousand
out at um howard springs to make sure we
look after those
returning australians i'm not exactly
sure which bits mr hunt has announced
today but we're obviously very
supportive here
the australian government work out which
aussies come home and what order we've
got planes from which countries that
they manage that that side of the
business and we make sure we look after
him here in the northern territory so we
are looking at doubling those numbers
out at
the center for national resilience the
national critical care and trauma centre
has been working
towards this for for a little while now
um what we wanted to make sure
was that in taking on people from
overseas in the centre for national
resilience you go look at a couple of
things
for capacity or headroom we've always
wanted to make sure we never take on
more numbers of people from hot spots
than maybe our public health system
could handle if if there is
any kind of outbreak in that so the head
room we've always been mindful of
there's a number of people coming in
um and making sure we've got the
capacity to look after we absolutely do
we always leave
a bit of head room there so my
understandings national critical care
and trauma can absolutely take care of
these people
central national resilience can handle
handle this public health system
candlelist you know we've got all our
ducks lined up and we're
very happy to work with the australian
government let's get more now on china's
decision to impose anti-dumping measures
on australian wines tony bateline is the
head of the industry body australian
grape
and wine and tony joins us now from
canberra hi there thanks for being with
us
uh what's your reaction to this move
obviously we're pretty disappointed
about it uh this investigation has been
going on since august
and we believe would go it's whole
distance to having tariffs put on
is very concerning for us so we heard
from our china correspondent a little
earlier he was saying uh bill bertel's
that the tariffs will range from between
100 to over 200
percent what that's what will that do to
australian winemakers business
well obviously at the higher end of this
it makes us very uncompetitive so the
chinese import markets
really really strong market not just for
australia but also within our
competitors in europe and south america
so it will put us such a disadvantage
that many
exporters just won't be able to send
product this is all going to
is dude start tomorrow isn't it yeah it
is it's supposed to come in tomorrow so
uh as you probably know though we've
already had some border delays over the
last couple of weeks so not a lot of
practice has been getting through
customs at the moment
so if you've got wine sitting out there
waiting to enter china what's going to
happen to that
well it's a really interesting question
so some of those wines
may well go in other wines were may well
be returned back to australia we just
don't know at this stage
chinese importers were told to stop
buying australian wine earlier this
month what's been the impact of that
on your industry it's been dramatic so
we've probably had a reduction in
export approvals of around 80 to 90 over
the past
fortnight uh and so as i say very little
products going in
what is has gone in is sitting basically
in customs
trying to go through increased testing
and compliance procedures
is china your biggest export market it's
our biggest market by a long way it's a
1.2 billion dollar markets around 40
percent of our exports so
vitally important to the sector are you
happy with the level of support you're
getting from the australian government
we just heard from david littleproud
we're waiting
uh now also to hear from simon
birmingham the trade minister
what do you think about what they're
doing and saying yeah so i spoke to
the trade minister uh about 20 minutes
ago
he's going to get a briefing from
department of foreign affairs for the
industry this afternoon
uh they've been doing everything i can
it's pretty difficult situation
uh i've got nothing but praise for the
support of dd fat at the moment we've
been working closely in the whole
anti-dumping investigation
i i just hope that you know we can build
up these relationships
and eventually get through this and how
volumes exported to
china how have they increased over the
years tony
oh dramatic increase since we got the
free trading government place
we've gone more than tenfold we were
virtually nothing 10 years ago into
china
and now to the 1.2 billion dollar market
that's from you know 50 000
to 1.2 billion that's the type of
increase it's been amazing
that's the number of the problem though
isn't it that the domestic wine industry
in china is saying that they can't
compete
yeah but i think the domestic industry
has a lot more problems than competition
from our exports
it's a very difficult country to grow
grapes in you know in their premium
grind going region they have to bury
their vines in the winter it's so cold
that makes it very expensive and very
difficult to produce wine so
there's some systemic issues with the
industry we would like to work with them
we've got great technical expertise
but i think to blame imports is
simplistic
and what sort of wine is sent to china
than tony is it the the top
shelf stuff or is it the cheaper
varieties that tend to go
well we go across all price points but
by far and away it's our high quality
red wine
so around 95 percent of our exports to
china are red wine and
it's our premium price point so it's our
highest price point market in the world
so we we don't do as well in any other
market
in terms of price so you know the really
high quality rents they'll go to china
so if those this uh this measure goes
through this could be devastating
oh absolutely we are so concerned about
the potential impact of this
and not just on china exports but of
course the product if it doesn't go to
china has to go somewhere
so it has flown effects right through uh
domestically
right through those small family
businesses you don't have to export
china to be at risk
yeah so could small some small wineries
go under as a result
absolutely we don't know the full impact
we're still trying to assess it
look what those tariffs will do but but
it's deeply concerning in terms of
employment
jobs and exports tony basilene thank you
thank you very much the world of
professional video gaming known as
esports is a massive industry with big
prize money
and that's attracting match fixing
there's been a big spike in reports
of fraud with one of australia's highest
profile teams targeted
here's ian smith who's head of the
esports integrity commission
well they're certainly increasing ros um
we we received two types of complaint
we received many complaints from punters
who are disgruntled with outcomes and
they call it match fixing
i largely ignore those but we do receive
a significant number of credible
reports primarily from the betting
industry that we work with
quite closely because that's the best
way of determining whether something
might or might not be match fixed
so realistically uh last year i think we
received about 18
credible reports of which we're still
investigating about
17. and these are big matches they're
big tournaments are they that are
broadcast
internationally yes although that's not
particularly where the match fixing is
occurring so you get
you know these big events and obviously
outside of the pandemic these are
live in-person events with many
thousands of people as you're showing in
your graphics there
but the vast majority of matches
actually take place online
and there are various tiers so at tier
one you wouldn't expect to get
significant match fixing reports because
those are very high profile high money
matches
whereas uh in the second tier where
there's low prize money less well-known
players and less scrutiny of course just
like every other sport
there's more prevalent match fixing
attempts there
and what happened with the australian
team fanatic ian they contacted you
about being approached by a match fixer
posing as a potential
investor what happened there
well it's a very typical thing actually
it happens quite a lot
in most traditional sports as well but
it tends to happen at the
at the individual sport level it's
actually relatively
uncommon in team sport to be approached
in this way
outside of uh football where in you know
second and third tier football
particularly in eastern europe it's
actually
of often the case that teams are
actually owned by match fixes
and corrupt and organized crime but
i've not this is the first time it's
happened at a team level
for us uh in esports as far as i know
certainly the first time it's been
reported
has it been proved and have you taken
action
well we we don't have jurisdiction in
this case to actually take
action bear in mind that there's no
governing body in esports we're a
voluntary regulator
and really only have uh jurisdiction
over those tournaments that are
that are put together by our members
rather than
you know as a general proposition we are
not the equivalent of fifa
and how much success are you having in
clamping down on fraud
in are you able to get across all the
complaints that you receive
well not really we're drastically under
resourced you know you can imagine that
we have a higher case load for example
than the anti-corruption unit in cricket
who have an annual budget of around two
to three million dollars our budget
is about two hundred and fifty thousand
dollars and we're trying to do the two
million dollar job
so no we are filing we are falling short
that's just the nature of it while the
industry comes together
again it's a very fractured industry and
has multiple levels across multiple
countries and
you know we're getting there but we're a
long way from being able to deal with
all of this it's a massive problem
in smith we'll let you get to bed thank
you for talking to us thank you very
much
diesel fumes can cause a range of health
problems